.. _seismic_refraction_introduction:

Introduction
************

.. sidebar:: Seismic Methods

    .. figure:: ./images/icon_refrac.gif
    	:align: center

Seismic methods involve generating acoustic energy in the form of pressure or
shear waves that propagate into the ground. Sensors (geophones) are installed
in lines on the surface, and they record the faint ground motions caused by
the acoustic energy (seismic waves) that returns from boundaries where the
elastic properties of subsurface materials change. At such boundaries there
are two fundamental physical effects. "Reflection" means some of the energy
impinging on the interface is returned or "bounced" back towards the surface--
light reflecting from a semi-transparent mirror is a good analogy.
"Refraction" is less intuitive, but the concept is recognizable in images of
objects under water. When light arrives at a boundary, the portion that passes
through is bent so it's direction of propagation changes. In fact, seismic
refraction involves detecting energy that has been bent so that it travels
along the interface between two subsurface materials, before returning to the
surface where it's effects can be measured. The phenomenon is not intuitive,
but it is explained in the "Ray paths" section of this chapter.

There are far more professional geophysicists employed in the seismic industry
than any other branch of applied geophysics. Most are working at seismic
reflection in it's many forms for the oil/gas exploration industries. Some
mineral exploration companies have recently made 3D seismic reflection
surveying common practice for helping delineate known ore bodies, but it is
not universally used. The geotechnical and environmental industries use
seismic refraction regularly for efficient assessment of thickness and
mechanical properties in the top few 10s of meters. Seismic reflection has
more recently become economical for shallow work (from roughly 5 meters depth,
down to 100's of meters).


.. figure::  ./images/tailings-seis1.jpg
	:align: center

	A small refraction survey on mine tailings. There are 12 geophones, a hammer is used on the side of a metal block (the operator is standing on it) to produce shear waves. The recording device, it's computer and battery are just left of centre.

In this chapter we will concentrate seismic refraction for near surface
investigations. Seismic refraction is most useful when the velocity of seismic
signals in each layer increases with depth. Therefore, where higher velocity
(e.g. clay) layers may overlie lower velocity (e.g. sand or gravel) layers,
seismic refraction may yield incorrect results. In addition, seismic
refraction requires geophone arrays with lengths of approximately 4 to 5 times
the depth to the layer of interest (for example the top of bedrock). Therefore
seismic refraction is commonly limited to mapping layers to depths less than
30-50 meters. Greater depths are possible, but the required array lengths may
exceed site dimensions, and the shot energy required to transmit seismic
arrivals for the required distances may necessitate the use of large explosive
charges.
